Staking update (#419)
iota-community/iota-wiki: internal/learn/iota-token/staking-iota.md

---
id: staking-iota
title: Staking IOTA
description: Everything you need to know about all the different upcoming staking opportunities in IOTA, Assembly, and Shimmer network.
---

# Staking in the IOTA network ecosystem

IOTA introduced two new networks that will exist next to the main network: the Shimmer staging network and the Assembly trustless smart contract network. This marks a historical event and a vast increase of utility for the IOTA token.
Both networks will launch with their own native tokens: SMR for Shimmer and ASMB for Assembly. With the new tokenomics and incentive structure around these networks, it is now possible to stake tokens.

- Find the blog post introducing IOTA staking [here](https://blog.iota.org/introducing-iota-staking/).

> - Find the announcement of the start of IOTA staking [here](https://blog.iota.org/iota-staking-start/).

Reviewer: I think it is visually more clear if we wrap this in a note or info admonition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::info

- Find the blog post introducing IOTA staking [here](https://blog.iota.org/introducing-iota-staking/).
- Find the announcement of the start of IOTA staking [here](https://blog.iota.org/iota-staking-start/).

:::
```

### IOTA staking for SMR rewards

Shimmer, the incentivized testnet and battlefield for IOTA's core technology innovations, will be bootstrapped purely from IOTA token stakers. The initial token supply of the Shimmer network will only rely on the amount of IOTA tokens staked for Shimmer in the 90-day staking period, and 100% of the initial supply will be distributed to IOTA token holders.

- The same staking functionality used for Assembly in the Firefly Wallet will also be used for Shimmer.
- Shimmer tokens will be distributed at a fixed rate of `1 Shimmer per 1 MIOTA per milestone`.

![shimmer staking](/img/learn/iota-token/shimmer-staking.png)

You can read how to stake and calculate the possible rewards [here](https://shimmer.network/claim).
- With the launch of the Shimmer network, these generated Shimmer tokens will be distributed to the IOTA stakers. This distribution will be implemented as a functionality within the Firefly wallet. As long as the Shimmer network is not yet launched, Firefly will hold the record of rewards for the IOTA token holder. 

> ## Staking IOTA tokens to further bootstrap the Assembly network

Reviewer: I think we should shorten this header, it looks weird in the table of contents.

Reviewer: I still think this should mention "post-launch" as it is a continuation of the "pre-launch" staking period.

Reviewer 2: Now? 😅 Bootstrap isn‘t the right word then imo

Reviewer: Its not really supporting either. It's just to finish the distribution of the remainder of the 20% after the pre-launch period. This is all described below, so I'd just name it "Assemy post-launch staking" to remain in the pre-launch header scheme above. Wdyt?

Reviewer 2: Done

As described in the Assembly [token launch and fair distribution scheme](https://blog.assembly.sc/assembly-fair-launch-token-distribution/), a total of 20% of the Assembly supply is given to IOTA token stakers. 
The first distribution phase happens in the 90 days as described above.
The second ASMB distribution will happen during the first 21 months of the newly launched Assembly network.

![assembly supply](/img/learn/iota-token/assembly-supply.png)

- The amount of ASMB tokens that can be distributed during these 21 months depends totally on the number of tokens that are still undistributed after the initial 90 days of staking. 
- If less than 100% of IOTA tokens have been staked for Assembly (which would distribute 8 billion ASMB tokens to IOTA stakers), the remaining ASMB tokens will be distributed in addition to the already planned 12 billion ASMB tokens to IOTA stakers.
If only 6 billion ASMB tokens had been distributed in the first 90 days, 14 billion ASMB tokens would still be available during the second 21 month staking period.
- The ASMB distribution during the second staking period will happen on a **daily fixed rate**.

> - Assuming 14 billion ASMB tokens will be available to distribute, this would lead to a daily payout of: 

Reviewer: I think this bullet point is logically part of the sub-list that follows, as it is part of the example to explain the "fixed rate" bullet point above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Assuming 14 billion ASMB tokens will be available to distribute, this would lead to a daily payout of: 
```

Also, the Tangle, with its newly implemented tokenization abilities and multi-asset functionalities, will be the home of all kinds of interoperable tokens, able to be freely exchanged between accounts on smart contract chains and the Tangle.

In Assembly [token launch and fair distribution sheme](https://blog.assembly.sc/assembly-fair-launch-token-distribution/) it is planned to distribute a total of 20% of the Assembly supply to IOTA token holders. 
The first distribution phase happens in the 90 days as described above.
To further incentivize IOTA token owners to secure the IOTA network and help Assembly in its start phase, another ASMB distribution will happen during the first 21 months of the newly launched Assembly network.

![assembly supply](/img/learn/iota-token/assembly-supply.png)

> - the amount of ASMB tokens that can be distributed during these 21 months depends totally on the number of tokens that are still undistributed after the initial 90 days of staking. 
> - If less than 100% of IOTA tokens have been staked for Assembly (which would distribute 8 Billion ASMB tokens to IOTA stakers), the remaining ASMB tokens will be distributed together with the planned 12 Billion ASMB tokens to IOTA stakers.
> If only 6 Billion ASMB tokens could be distributed in the first 90 days, 14 Billion ASMB tokens will be available during the second 21 month staking period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- At least 12 billion ASMB tokens will be distributed during these 21 months.
- If less then 100% of IOTA tokens have been staked during the pre-launch staking period, the  amount of ASMB tokens to distribute in this post-launch staking period increases proportionally.
```

This is an attempt from me to make this part a little shorter.

> - the ASMB distribution during the second staking period will happen on a **daily fixed rate**
> - assuming 14 Billion ASMB tokens will be available to distribute, this would lead to a daily payout of 
>     - 21.909.233 ASMB tokens to the IOTA stakers over 639 days
>     - the amount of individual received ASMB tokens per day depends on the total percentual part an IOTA staker holds of the total daily staked amount of IOTA tokens.
>     - the fewer total IOTA tokens are staked, the higher the individual payout of theis 21.909.233 ASMB tokens per day for an IOTA staker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The ASMB token distribution during this staking period will happen on a **daily fixed rate**:
    - Assuming 14 billion ASMB tokens will be available to distribute, this would lead to a daily payout of 21.909.233 ASMB tokens to the IOTA stakers over 639 days.
    - The amount of individually received ASMB tokens per day depends on how much IOTA tokens the holder staked compared to the total amount of IOTA tokens staked on that day.
    - The fewer total IOTA tokens staked, the higher the individual payout per day for an IOTA staker.
```

![assembly token release](/img/learn/iota-token/assembly-token-release.png)

> ## 3.) Stake Assembly tokens to secure and validate the Assembly network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ASMB staking
```

> Assembly will have two different ways to reward Assembly token stakers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assembly will have two different ways to reward ASMB token stakers:
```

1. Reward Assembly stakers for holding ASMB tokens and distributing newly minted ASMB tokens as part of the inflationary token distribution.
    - The yearly inflation of the Assembly supply is set to 8%. This inflation rate is planned to be reduced over the years by community governance decisions.

>     - The final mechanism of how this distribution will happen is not yet published

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The mechanism of this distribution is not yet published.
```

> 2. Reward Assembly stakers to secure the Assembly chains by staking their ASMB tokens with a Validator.
>     - This mechanism is crucial to the security and functionality of the Assembly smart contract chains. Validators in the IOTA smart contract chains deployed in Assembly need to deposit Assembly tokens as a security bond in the Assembly Root chain contract. This stake deposited by validators decides in which chains they can participate as validators. The higher the stake a validator can offer as a security deposit, the more likely this validator will be chosen to secure high-value smart contract chains. Those chains will likely be more profitable for the validator, so the incentive to deposit more stakes as a security deposit in Assembly is very high. You can read details of that mechanism [here.](https://blog.assembly.sc/meet-assembly-2-validators-and-committees/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Reward Assembly stakers to secure the Assembly chains by staking their ASMB tokens with a Validator. This mechanism is crucial to the security and functionality of the Assembly smart contract chains. Validators in the IOTA smart contract chains deployed in Assembly need to deposit Assembly tokens as a security bond in the Assembly Root chain contract. This stake deposited by validators decides in which chains they can participate as validators. The higher the stake a validator can offer as a security deposit, the more likely this validator will be chosen to secure high-value smart contract chains. Those chains will likely be more profitable for the validator, so the incentive to deposit more stakes as a security deposit in Assembly is very high. You can read details of that mechanism [here](https://blog.assembly.sc/meet-assembly-2-validators-and-committees/).
```
I think the explanation should not be a list item here.

>     - A Validator must deposit some amount of tokens that he owns himself and can also deposit tokens that Assembly tokens holders deposited to the validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - A Validator must deposit some amount of tokens that he owns itself and can also deposit tokens that Assembly tokens holders deposited to the validator.
```

    - For this delegated stake from usual Assembly holders, the validators will most likely be willing to pay a part of the gained profits from validating smart contracts to the Assembly holders that deposited their tokens to the validator.

>     - This involves a potential risk, as a deposited stake in the Assembly root chain contract can be partially or fully slashed if the validator acts maliciously. But, besides this small theoretical risk, delegating stake to a validator will also offer higher rewards for Assembly stakers, as a share of the validators profit will be distributed to the stakers that delegate the stake to the validator.

Reviewer: This part needs some more love and clear wording, because it is quite important, but I don't feel like it gets the point across.

> ## 4.) Stake Shimmer tokens to help testing and support the Shimmer network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## SMR staking
```

> The Shimmer network has a planned yearly inflation of 8%. These new minted Shimmer tokens will be distributed to Shimmer stakers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Shimmer network has a planned yearly inflation of 8%. These new minted SMR tokens will be distributed to SMR stakers. 
```

> By staking your Shimmer tokens you will help the network to fullfill it's pupose of being an incentivised playground for applications to test new IOTA technology features in a real network with real value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By staking your SMR tokens you will help the network to fulfill its purpose of being an incentivized playground for applications to test new IOTA technology features on a network that is operated like the main network and which has real value.
```

> Read some more info about the Shimmer network here in the [FAQ.](https://shimmer.network/faqs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about the Shimmer network, read the Shimmer FAQ [here](https://shimmer.network/faqs).
```
